Create Blog Post “auto-layout-for-vonage-video-application” (#1811)
Nexmo/deved-platform: content/blog/en/auto-layout-for-vonage-video-application.md

---
title: Auto Layout for Vonage Video Application
description: Using opentok-layout-js we can easily render vonage video call
  participants on the screen. This saves time and makes it super simple to build
  video application using vonage video sdk.
author: mofi-rahman
published: false
published_at: 2021-11-11T15:40:53.771Z
updated_at: 2021-11-11T15:40:53.817Z
category: tutorial
tags:
  - video-api
comments: false
spotlight: false
redirect: ""
canonical: ""
outdated: false
replacement_url: ""
---

> Vonage Video API makes it very easy to create our very own video chat application. With as little as 15 lines of code we can get a working video application. But to make it look and feel like a proper video chat app we have to do some work. One of these challenges is to properly place the participants in the screen. We are all kind of familiar with how a video chat app looks. Apps like Zoom, Teams, Google Meet or Webex all have their distinct look. But fundamentally they all accomplish the same goal: place participants in the screen in some form of grid and rearrange them in different screen sizes. Thats what we will attempt to do for our Vonage Video Application today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vonage Video API makes it easier to create our own video chat application with as little as 15 lines of code. To make it look and feel like a proper video chat app we have to do some more work. One challenge is to properly place the participants on the screen. Apps like Zoom, Teams, Google Meet, and Webex all have their own distinct looks. Fundamentally they all accomplish the same goal: place participants on the screen in some form of a grid and rearrange them based on different screen sizes. That's what we will do for our Vonage Video Application today.
```
I don't think we want to assume what people are already familiar with because if there's a slight chance someone may not know about it, we don't want them to feel bad.

> This is what we will have at the end of the tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of what we will be building.
```

> [![demo9a78f3a979365eb2.gif](https://s9.gifyu.com/images/demo9a78f3a979365eb2.gif)](https://gifyu.com/image/S22vG)

Reviewer: Probably want to upload the gif to the CMS just in case gifyu.com goes down.

## Prerequisite

> - Text editor (VS Code)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Text editor (e.g. VS Code)
```

> - Browser

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Web Browser
```

## Getting started

> The source code of this demo is in [This repo](https://github.com/moficodes/opentok-layout-demo). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source code for this demo is in [this repo](https://github.com/moficodes/opentok-layout-demo). 
```
Is this something we want to put into a Vonage repo?

> The main ingredient to our auto layout is [Opentok Layout JS](https://github.com/aullman/opentok-layout-js). This is an Open Source library created by Adam Ullman. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main ingredient to make our auto layout work is [Opentok Layout JS](https://github.com/aullman/opentok-layout-js). This is an open-source library created by Adam Ullman. 
```
Had to look it up to make sure:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/o/open-source

## Code Deep Dive

> The code for this demo is fairly short. There are 4 files in total. `index.html`, `style.css`, `script.js` and `opentok-layout.js` which is downloaded from [Opentok Layout JS](https://github.com/aullman/opentok-layout-js) repository. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code for this demo is fairly short. There are 4 files in total. Three that we will create (`index.html`, `style.css`, `script.js`) and one (`opentok-layout.js`) that is downloaded from [Opentok Layout JS](https://github.com/aullman/opentok-layout-js) repository. 
```

### index.html

> In `<head>` of our html file we add reference to Opentok Client Library used for getting access to `OT` which allows us to get camera access. We also include `opentok-layout.js` and our `style.css`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `<head>` section of our HTML file, we add a reference to the Opentok Client Library. It is used for getting access to `OT` which allows us to get camera access. We also include `opentok-layout.js` and our `style.css`.
```

```html
    <script src="https://static.opentok.com/v2/js/opentok.min.js"></script>
    <script src="js/opentok-layout.js"></script>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
```

> In the `<body>` we add an empty `div` with `id="layout"`. This is the container where we will place all our participant videos. We also have two buttons used for adding and removing video from our layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `<body>`, we add an empty `div` with `id="layout"`. This is the container where we will place all our participant videos. We also have two buttons used for adding and removing videos from our layout.
```

```html
    <div id="layout"></div>
    <div id="buttons">
      <input
        type="button"
        name="add"
        value="Add"
        id="add"
        onclick="addElement()"
      />
      <input
        type="button"
        name="remove"
        value="Remove"
        id="remove"
        onclick="removeElement()"
      />
    </div>
``` 

> Finally we add reference to our `script.js` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we add a reference to our `script.js` file right after the `</body>` tag.
```
Do you want to add the code snippet for that here?

### style.css

> Most of the css file is used to place the buttons in the bottom of the screen and leave the rest of the screen real estate for `layout` container. There is some css transition set to make the transition from one view to another look smooth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the CSS file is used to place the buttons at the bottom of the screen Which leaves the rest of the screen real estate for the `layout` container. The container has a CSS transition property set to make the layout changes from adding and removing videos look smooth.
```

### script.js

> This is where we initialize and make use of `opentok-layout-js`. We first get access to our `layoutEl` and create a global variable of `layout` function which we will call every time we need to reorganize the screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where we initialize and make use of the Opentok Layout JS library. We first create a reference to our layout container, `layoutEl`. Then a `layout` variable is initialized and set to an Opentok Layout JS function that returns when passed in `layoutEl` and some options. `layout` is called every time we need to reorganize the application's layout when videos are added, removed, or the screen size changes.
```

```js

> var layoutEl = document.getElementById('layout');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const layoutEl = document.getElementById('layout');
```
Pretty sure you can set it as a constant since it's not changing.

> var layout;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let layout;
```
I think you can get away with let.

```

> Then we create a function that initializes the layout container and set the `layout` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

May not need this line since it's kind of explained above.

```js
function updateLayoutValues() {
  const opts = {
    maxRatio: 3 / 2,
    minRatio: 9 / 16,
    fixedRatio: false,
    alignItems: 'center',
    bigPercentage: 0.8,
    bigFixedRatio: false,
    bigMaxRatio: 3 / 2,
    bigMinRatio: 9 / 16,
    bigFirst: true,
    scaleLastRow: true,
    smallMaxWidth: Infinity,
    smallMaxHeight: Infinity,
    bigMaxWidth: Infinity,
    bigMaxHeight: Infinity,
    bigAlignItems: 'center',
    smallAlignItems: 'center',
  };
  layout = initLayoutContainer(layoutEl, opts).layout;
}
updateLayoutValues();
```

> You can read about what all the possible fields in `opts` are and what they mean [here](https://github.com/aullman/opentok-layout-js#usage). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is an explanation of all the `opts` properties and possible values in the Opentok Layout JS [ReadMe](https://github.com/aullman/opentok-layout-js#usage). 
```

> At this point we have `layout` ready to be called when we need to reorganize the participants. We also write functions for adding and removing elements. And finally a window resize event listener to call `layout` on window resize.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`layout` is called every time we need to reorganize the application's layout when videos are added, removed, or the window resizes.

There are also event listeners for the add and remove buttons. Another event listener is created for when a participant's video is double-clicked which will toggle between enlarging or shrinking the video. 
```

## Conclusion

> This was a quick demo to showcase how you can get easy auto layout for your Vonage Video Application. For creating a quick, easy and streamlined multi party Video Application using Vonage API you can make use of [Vonage Video Express](https://tokbox.com/developer/video-express/). Video Express actually uses `opentok-layout-js` and wraps our OpenTok client sdk to make building Multiparty Video application easier. You can get started with Vonage Video Express with [this article by Enrico](https://learn.vonage.com/blog/2021/09/27/create-a-multiparty-video-app-with-the-new-video-express/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was a quick explanation to showcase how you can achieve a responsive layout for your Vonage Video application.

For an even quicker path to creating a multi-party video application, you can make use of [Vonage Video Express](https://tokbox.com/developer/video-express/). Video Express uses `opentok-layout-js` and wraps our OpenTok Client SDK. You can learn how to use Vonage Video Express with [this article](https://learn.vonage.com/blog/2021/09/27/create-a-multiparty-video-app-with-the-new-video-express/) by Enrico.
```

> You can reach out to us via [Twitter](https://twitter.com/vonagedev) or [Slack](https://developer.nexmo.com/community/slack). 

Reviewer: Maybe something like:
```suggestion
If you have any questions or comments, please reach out to us via [Twitter](https://twitter.com/vonagedev) or [Slack](https://developer.nexmo.com/community/slack).
```
